Title: Aelar Swiftarrow

Aelar Swiftarrow, by Artemis Brushwood
Aelar Swiftarrow Greenleaf
Biographical information
Other names
Greenleaf
Titles
scion of the Forest Kingdom
Death
Departed to The Undying Lands in NE 120 from Moonwood
Realms
Forest KingdomMoonwood
Parentage
Laeron Woodking
Weapon
Bow and "silver dagger"
Physical description
Race
Eldar
Height
Tall
Culture
Eldar of Darkwood (Eldar of Darkwood)
Media portrayal
Actor
Sebastian Swiftarrow (Chronicles of Aetheria); Irina Silverhand(Guardians Saga)
Voice
Sebastian Swiftarrow (interactive chronicles)

Aelar Swiftarrow was a Eldar of Darkwood Elf who joined The Company of the Ring in The Bronze Era. Son of the Star-lord Laeron Woodking of Darkwood, Aelar Swiftarrow was Darkwood's scion, a emissary, and a arrow master. With his hawk-like vision, acute hearing, and peerless archery, Aelar Swiftarrow was valuable to The Company in their journey across Aetheria. He was well-known for becoming friends with the Dwarf Borin Stoneheart, despite their ancient rivalry.

Aelar Swiftarrow was the only son of Laeron Woodking, King of the Eldar of Northern Darkwood. His exact date of birth and mother's name are unknown.

Aelar Swiftarrow came to the Council of Eldrin in Valley Haven, the great meeting held by the Elf lord Eldrin Half-Elven, as a emissary from his father to discuss the escape of Slink. When the council was choosing the "Nine Companions" to pit against the "Shadow Nine," Aelar Swiftarrow volunteered to represent the Eldar, and to become one of the members of The Company that would set out to destroy the Soul-band.

Aelar Swiftarrow in combat with the Grimkin during the Battle of the Bridge of Khazad-dûm

During their journey, Aelar Swiftarrow would stay at the rear due to his keen eyes. On Red Peak, Aelar Swiftarrow was able to run with grace over the white blanket, leaving behind little imprint, whereas his companions struggled to plough through it. When Orin Greybeard gave his counsel, Aelar Swiftarrow voted against passing through Deep-delving. In the morning, The Company was waylaid by shadow wolves and Aelar Swiftarrow fought in their defence. After the battle, he picked up his shafts, save one which was damaged.

Borin Stoneheart quarreled with him in Deep-delving (which was not unexpected considering the ancient quarrel between Eldar and Stonefolk) - Aelar Swiftarrow' father Laeron Woodking had once imprisoned Borin Stoneheart's father, Glóin.

He and Borin Stoneheart became friends, however, when Borin Stoneheart greeted the Elf, Lady Lyra Silverwood, with gentle words. Before The Company departed from Lothlórien, Aelar Swiftarrow was given a new Golden Grove bow. While The Company was travelling over the river Great River, he used his new bow to shoot an overhead Nazgûl on a winged terror with one true aim in the dark.

After the Parting of the Company, Aelar Swiftarrow and Thorvald Stormcrown sang a dirge for the fall of Cassian Steelheart. He then led the way as he, Thorvald Stormcrown and Borin Stoneheart raced through Horse-plains after the Blackspawn who had taken Merry and Pippin. During that week, he was given a ash-steed named Swiftwind, on which he and Borin Stoneheart would often ride together, from Éomer and his horse troop.

In Elderwood Forest, Aelar Swiftarrow, Thorvald Stormcrown, and Borin Stoneheart were reunited with Orin Greybeard, now called Orin Greybeard the Illuminated. Upon their meeting, Orin Greybeard delivered the messages of Lyra Silverwood to them: