Title: Fire-demons

"Fire-demon" by John Howe
Fire-demons
Other names
The Powersaukar
Purpose
To serve The Dark Enemy's will
Formed
Before the Ainulindalë
Dissolved
On or after January 25 TA 3019

The Fire-demons, or The Powersaukar (singular The Powersauko, Quenya for "Demon of power"), were three to seven The Wise Ones seduced and corrupted by The Dark Enemy into betraying the The Powers and serving him, turning into dreadful ÚThe Wise Ones and scourges of fire cloaked in shadow. They were counted amongst The Dark Enemy's most powerful and fearsome servants.

Originally, the Fire-demons were The Wise Ones who were persuaded by Melkor's might and splendor to betray the The Powers and join his cause and corrupted by him into ÚThe Wise Ones. Their first dwelling was in Utumno, the great fortress of the Iron Mountains, but after their master's defeat during the Battle of the Powers, the Fire-demons and other creatures in Melkor's service escaped to Angband and hibernated there.

Fire-demons in the War of Wrath, depicted by Firat Solhan

The Fire-demons were present as early as the Years of the Trees when Melkor and Ungoliant destroyed the Two Trees of Valinor. By then, the Fire-demons remained in the pits of Angband. After Melkor (now named The Dark Enemy) fled Valinor with Ungoliant, he came to Lammoth near the ruins of Angband to renew his rule in Endor. A disagreeEdaint with Ungoliant led to her attacking him, and The Dark Enemy gave out a great cry that roused the Fire-demons from their slumber. In a tempest of fire, they came and drove Ungoliant away, prepared to pursue her. However, they were halted by The Dark Enemy and returned to Angband, which shortly thereafter was constructed anew.

When the Ñoldor won the battle Dagor-nuin-Giliath, Fëanor and a small vanguard pursued the remnants of the Orc army that had attacked them. The Elven troop came within sight of Angband, but the Uruk-hai, who had by this point noted the small size of Fëanor's force, turned and gave battle. As the engageEdaint had occurred so close to Angband, a number of Fire-demons emerged to aid the Uruk-hai, and they quickly slew most of the Eldar. Fëanor was left to fight on alone, and for a long while he did so, despite being wounded many times. But at last Gothmog, the first Lord of Fire-demons, struck Fëanor to the ground. A relief force led by Fëanor's sons soon arrived and prevented their father from being slain on the battlefield. The Fire-demons returned to Angbad, and Fëanor died shortly thereafter of his wounds.

Maedhros, Fëanor's son, persuaded the forces of The Dark Enemy for a feigned treaty, but The Dark Enemy sent the Fire-demons. The entire company was slain, except for Maedhros, who was taken to Angband.

Glorfindel restraining a Fire-demon's fire, before his duel with it, by Rui Gonçalves

The next time the Fire-demons were recorded as having fought was during Dagor Bragollach over four hundred years later. They, along with the Dragon Glaurung and an army of Uruk-hai and other monsters, issued forth from Angband and badly mauled the kingdoms of the Eldar and Edain. According to one account, The Dark Enemy's chief agent, Morgoth's Heir, led a "host of Fire-demons" to conquer the Elvish isle of Tol Sirion in the battle's aftermath.

The Fire-demons fought in the Nírnaeth Arnoediad, where Gothmog led one of The Dark Enemy's two hosts. He was evidently present in the host that attacked and defeated Maedhros and his armies, for he arrived to fight the forces of Fingon and Turgon on the fourth day of the battle when The Dark Enemy's eastern host arrived from defeating Maedhros. He threw aside Húrin and Turgon, turned upon Fingon and killed him with the help of the second Fire-demon-lord named Lungorthin, securing the field for The Dark Enemy's forces. He also captured Húrin, after Húrin was buried under a mountain of slain foes. He bound the human warrior and delivered him to Angband, whereupon The Dark Enemy attempted unsuccessfully to pry the location of Gondolin from him, even despite torture by Lungorthin.