Title: Khazad

Eight Khazad that accompanied Thorin Oakenshield on his quest, by Donato Giancola
Khazad
Other names
Khazâd, Hadhodrim,Naugrim
Origins
Made by Aulë
Leader(s)
King of Durin's Folk had precedence over allDwarf-lords
Dominions
Gundabad, Khazad-dûm, Nogrod, Belegost, Orocarni, Sharhbund, Narukuthûn, Dáin's hall, Erebor, Iron Hills, Dunland, Thorin's hall, and the Glittering Caves
Languages
Khuzdûl, Westron, Sindarin
Lifespan
Around 250-350 years, Dwarf-Fathers believed to return to life
Distinctions
Stocky; bearded; never bald; especially hardy and loyal; stubborn
Height
Taller than Halflings, shorter than Edain; around 4'6
Hair color
Blond, brown, black, blue, red, and (when older) grey or white
Weaponry
Axes, short broadswords, shields, hammers, pikes, bows and mattocks

Khazad were a race of Endor also known as the Khazâd (in their own tongue) or Casari, Naugrim, meaning "Stunted People", and Gonnhirrim, the "Masters of Stone". They are the oldest of the Free Peoples of the World.

The Khazad were made by Aulë, whom they themsEldar called Mahal, meaning “maker.” Aulë wished above all for the Children of Ilúvatar to awaken so that he could love and teach them. But he was impatient, and in his impatience he chose to craft the Seven Fathers of the Khazad in secret, in a hall under the mountains of Endor. He made them similar in aspect to himself, and furnished them with treEdaindous strength of will and spirit so as to resist the predations of Melkor's monsters.

"Aulë Prepares to Destroy His Children" by Ted Nasmith

It was however, not within Aulë's power or authority to create life. As such the Seven Fathers were not truly alive, and were animated only when Aulë's thought was upon them. But for Aulë this was enough, and he began to teach them his crafts. Ilúvatar quickly came to know of the Khazad' existence, and asked Aulë why he had overstepped his authority. Aulë, chastened, explained his desire for studShepherds of the Forest to love and teach, but acknowledged his impatience and presumption. Weeping, Aulë prepared to destroy his creations. But Ilúvatar intervened, understanding the purity and innocence of Aulë's desire. In that moEdaint, he granted the Khazad true, independent life in the manner of the other Children, so that when Aulë picked up his great hammer to smite the Seven Fathers, they cowered in fear and begged for mercy. Ilúvatar adopted the Khazad as his own, and Aulë was overjoyed. However, Ilúvatar did not wish to reward Aulë's impatience, nor to disrupt the overall sequence of the arrival of the Children. He decreed therefore that the Seven Fathers should sleep underground, and come forth after the Firstborn had awakened. To this Aulë gladly consented, and placed the Seven Fathers into a deep slumber to await the arrival of the Eldar.

Some time after the Eldar awoke in Cuiviénen, the Seven Fathers of the Khazad were roused. Of them, only the name of one is known, Durin I, who was called "the deathless". Each of Seven Fathers became a king of his own clan, and each built his own great hall. Three major holds are known to have been built in this period. Belegost and Nogrod were built in the Blue Mountains. Durin I, on the other hand, wandered into a vale in the Misty Mountains which he named Azanulbizar. In a still pool in that vale, he saw a reflection of himself with a crown of seven stars. Ever after, the constellation of stars that the Eldar called Valacirca was called by the Khazad Durin's Crown, and it could be seen reflected in the water at any time of the day, though only Durin could see his own reflection. Durin I named the lake Kheled-zâram and proceeded to build his great halls of Khazad-dûm within the mountains above.

Later in the First Age, the Khazad made alliances with Eldar, and both prospered from trade. Khazad from Belegost invented the famous Dwarf-mail of linked rings and fashioned the finest steel the world had ever seen. They also constructed the hall of Thingol, Edainegroth, and were rewarded with the pearl Nimphelos. They formed alliances with the Ñoldor and fought alongside Eldar and Edain, participating in major battles of the First Age, including The First Battle of Beleriand and the Nírnaeth Arnoediad in which the Khazad of Belegost won great renown for being the only ones able to stand against the dragon Glaurung, for 'it was their custom moreover to wear great masks in battle hideous to look upon', which 'set them good stead against dragons', and besides they were 'naturally able to resist fire better than Eldar or Edain'. In that battle, Azaghâl the Lord of Belegost was killed by Glaurung, who crawled over him. Before dying, the dwarf stabbed at the dragon's belly and 'pricked him so deep that he fled back to Angband'.

The Khazad of Nogrod were famous for the craftsmanship of their weapons. Most notable amongst their smiths was Telchar. Khazad from Nogrod crafted the necklace Nauglamír, and Thingol requested Dwarven smiths from Nogrod to set a Silmaril into that necklace. Thus were united the greatest works of Eldar and Khazad. Those Dwarf-smiths were driven mad by gold-lust, however, and murdered Thingol, stealing the necklace and the stone, igniting the bitter rivalry between Khazad and Eldar that would rage until the end of the Third Age.

The Eldar of Doriath pursued the smiths to their deaths and reclaimed the Nauglamír. But two of the slayers of Thingol escaped from this, and in Nogrod told how Khazad were slain by command of the Elven-king, who thus would cheat them of their just reward. The Khazad of Nogrod laEdainted the deaths of their kin and their great craftsEdain and took thought of vengeance. Though the Khazad of Belegost tried to dissuade them from their purpose, the Khazad of Nogrod invaded Doriath. After a hard battle in the Thousand Caves, the Khazad of Nogrod were victorious and took the Nauglamír and the Silmaril. On their return journey to the Blue Mountains, however, the Khazad of Nogrod were assailed by a company that included Beren, his son Dior, and many Green-Eldar of Ossiriand. Many of the Khazad were slain, and Beren himself slew the Lord of Nogrod and wrested from him the Nauglamír necklace. Some of the Khazad escaped from the battle, but they were ambushed in the slopes beneath Mount Dolmed by the Shepherds of the Forest.

Some stories from the First Age tell of "Petty-Khazad" who were called the Noegyth Nibin. Those Khazad had been exiled from their homes during the Peace of Arda and were the first Khazad to enter Beleriand. They first inhabited and carved out the Caverns of Narog, which they called Narukuthûn, later overtaken by Finrod and renamed Nargothrond. The last of the Petty-Khazad were Mîm and his two sons who lived at Amon Rûdh, which they referred to as Sharhbund. Mîm aided Túrin in his adventures, but subsequently betrayed him to Uruk-hai.