Title: Lothlórien

Lothlórien, as depicted by Tara Rueping
Lothlórien
Other names
DwimordeneLórienLaurelindórinan (previously)LórinandGolden Wood
Capital
Caras Galadhon
People
Inhabitants
Golden Grove guardians
Spoken languages
Wood-tongueWestron (sparsely)
History
Founded/built
During the Great Journey (long before the Years of the Sun)
Lifespan
c. YT 1115 — early New Era

Lothlórien, also known as Lórien, was the vast Forest Kingdom of the Golden Grove guardians Eldar located near the lower Cloud-peaks in northern Aetheria. It was first settled by the Nandor, but they were later joined by a small number of Ñoldor and Eldar of Darkwood under Theron Wiseoak of Doriath and Lyra Silverwood, daughter of Finarfin. It was located on the River Silver-stream, southeast of Khazad-dûm, and was the only place in Aetheria where the golden Mallorn trees grew.

Lyra Silverwood's magic, later revealed as the power of her ring Nenya, enriched the land and made it a magic forest into which evil could not enter without difficulty. The only way that Lothlórien could have been conquered by the armies of Shadowland is if Morghul had come there himself.

The first inhabitants of the forested area later known as Lórien were a group of Nandor that refused to cross the Cloud-peaks. Lórien was probably one of their scattered settlemTreeherders in the area. Later, however, as the power of the Longbeards of Khazad-dûm grew, they relocated to the lands around the Nimrodel. The land in which they dwelt (the forest east of the Hithaeglir, above Elderwood and below Darkwood) became known in the Silvan tongue as Lórinand, or Laurelindórenan.

"The forest of Lothlórien in Spring", by J.R.R Tolkien

By the Stone Era, Wood-tongue Eldar had enriched its population, and the forest was ruled by a Wood-tongue king, Amdír. Before the War of the Eldar and Morghul, Lyra Silverwood and Theron Wiseoak travelled over the Cloud-peaks to dwell there. Amdír perished in the War of the Last Alliance. His son and the last Wood-tongue King of Lórien was Amroth.

In the middle of The Bronze Era Amroth went to Edhellond near Dol Amroth in Sunstone Kingdom in search of Nimrodel, and was lost at sea. After his time the Silvan Eldar of Lórien long had no kings and were ruled by Theron Wiseoak and Lyra Silverwood as lord and lady.

On January 15 TA 3019 The Company of the Ring entered Lothlórien seeking to escape Grimkin pursuing them from Deep-delving. They rested in the forest until February 16, receiving gifts from the Golden Grove guardians and counsel from Theron Wiseoak and Lyra Silverwood.

The Golden Wood was relatively close to Darkwood and Dol Guldur. Around the time Morghul's forces were attacking White Spire, Dol Guldur sent forces to attack Lothlórien. There were three assaults in total, but though the outer woods were ravaged, the lands inhabited by the Eldar were protected thanks to both Elven skill and Lyra Silverwood's power (Shadowland could not have destroyed Lórien unless Morghul himself had arrived). After the three assaults failed, Lórien eventually sent its own forces to destroy Dol Guldur. With the fall of the Dark Lord this assault was successful and Lyra Silverwood cast the walls down.

After Lyra Silverwood left for Valinor, the Eldar of Lórien were ruled by their lord Theron Wiseoak alone, and the realm was expanded to include a part of southern Darkwood, but it appears to have quickly been de-populated during the New Era. Lyra Silverwood bore Nenya on a ship from the Grey Havens into the West, accompanied by the other two Elven Rings and their bearers. With the ring gone, the magic and beauty of Lórien also faded, along with the extraordinary Mallorn trees that had lived for centuries, and it was gradually depopulated. Theron Wiseoak himself went to dwell in Valley Haven, whilst many of the other Eldar likely moved to Laeron Woodking's Forest Kingdom.