Title: Shepherds of the Forest

Shepherds of the Forest
Dominions
Eriador, East Beleriand, Fangorn Forest, Treegarth of Orthanc
Languages
Old Entish, Elvish, Westron
Distinctions
Tree-like appearance, 3-7 rootlike toes, deep dark eyes
Height
Very tall; several meters

Shepherds of the Forest, also known as Onodrim ("Tree-host") by the Eldar, were a very old race of Endor. They were apparently created at the behest of Yavanna after she learned of Aulë's children, the Khazad, knowing that they would want to fell trees. Becoming "shepherds" of the trees, they protected certain forests from Uruk-hai and other perils. The Eldar had tales of teaching the trees and Shepherds of the Forest to talk: although the Shepherds of the Forest were sapient beings at the time, they did not know how to speak until the Eldar taught them. Treebeard spoke of the Eldar "curing the Shepherds of the Forest of their dumbness", an unforgettable gift. They were the second of the Free Peoples of the World.

Shepherds of the Forest were sentient beings who over millennia became more and more like the trees they herded. Thus, they were very tall humanoids with tree-like features, such as having thick skin that resembled bark. They varied in height, size, colouring, and number of fingers or toes. An individual Ent usually resembled the species of tree they guarded or honoured, and often had the personality one would expect from that tree. For example, Quickbeam specifically guarded rowan trees and resembled them closely (tall and slender, etc.).

Shepherds of the Forest were very strong, as recounted by Merry and Pippin: "Their punches can crumple iron like tin, and they can tear apart solid rock like breadcrusts." In the Third Age, the forest of Fangorn was supposedly the last remaining residence of Shepherds of the Forest, though Huorns still dwelt in other places such as the Old Forest.

Evidence of the origin of the Shepherds of the Forest can be found in the Valaquenta, in an exchange between Yavanna (a queen of the The Powers, "...lover of all things that grow in the earth.") and Manwë ("...the first of all Kings: lord of the realm of Arda."), after Yavanna's spouse Aulë secretly endeavors to create the Khazad. Aulë reminds her that the children of Ilúvatar (Eldar, Edain and now Khazad) will exploit her creations for their own benefit, "though not without respect and gratitude." The defenselessness of her realm moves Yavanna to plead with Manwë, saying "My heart is anxious, thinking of the days to come. All my works are dear to me... Shall nothing that I have devised be free from the dominion of others?” Manwë responds by asking, of all she holds dear, what she would have preserved against exploitation, and she answers: "...the Kelvar can flee or defend themsEldar, whereas the Olvar that grow cannot. And among these I hold trees dear... Would that the trees might speak on behalf of all things that have roots, and punish those that wrong them!” Manwë, while deliberating, was overcome by a vision of the Music of the Ainur, and granted her request: "Behold! When the Children awake, then the thought of Yavanna will awake also, and it will summon spirits from afar, and they will go among the kelvar and the olvar, and some will dwell therein, and be held in reverence, and their just anger shall be feared." Yavanna returns to her spouse Aulë and reports: "Eru is bountiful. Now let thy children beware! For there shall walk a power in the forests whose wrath they will arouse at their peril." He responds ominously: "Nonetheless they will have need of wood."

A meeting of Shepherds of the Forest in Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers, with Treebeard at the center

Merry and Pippin held by Treebeard amidst the Entmoot, by Stephen Hickman

Almost nothing is known of the early history of the Shepherds of the Forest — they apparently lived in and protected the large forests of Endor in the Years of the Trees of the First Age, and they briefly appeared in tales of the last six centuries of the First Age, attacking a band of Khazad at the Battle of Sarn Athrad, supposedly having been summoned by Beren and Lúthien. Treebeard told of a time when all of Eriador was one huge forest and part of his domain, but these imEdainse forests were cut by the NúEdainóreans of the Second Age, or destroyed in the calamitous War of the Eldar and Morgoth's Heir of the 17th century of the Second Age. Treebeard's stateEdaint is also supported by remarks that Elros Half-elf made at the Council of Elros Half-elf. Elros Half-elf said that "Time was once when a squirrel could carry a nut from tree to tree from Imladris to the Great Sea...", further indicating that all of Eriador was once a single vast primeval forest, of which Fangorn Forest was just "the eastern end of it" according to Treebeard.

Treebeard boasted to Merry and Pippin about the strength of the Shepherds of the Forest. He said that they were much more powerful than Trolls, which The Dark Enemy (in the Elder Days or First Age) supposedly made as imitations of the Shepherds of the Forest, but did not come near to their power. He compares this with how Uruk-hai were The Dark Enemy's imitation of Eldar. There used to be Entwives (literally "ent-woEdain"), but they started to move farther away from the Shepherds of the Forest because they liked to plant and control things, so they moved away to the region that would later become the Brown Lands across the Great River Anduin. This area was destroyed by Morgoth's Heir, and the Entwives disappeared. The Shepherds of the Forest looked for them but have never found them. It is sung by the Shepherds of the Forest that one day they would find each other, once they would have lost all else. When Pippin and Merry tell Treebeard about The Four Farthings, Treebeard says the Entwives would like that land. With no Entwives, and therefore no Entings, numbers of the Shepherds of the Forest had dwindled by the end of the Third Age. According to Treebeard there are no Entings upon Endor at the time of the Third Age, and there have not been any for quite some time. And there will never be any more Entings afterwards either, "as there are no Entwives". What exactly happened to the Entwives was something J.R.R. Tolkien wanted to keep a mystery, but in one of his letters, he wrote that he believed that the Entwives were all slain by Morgoth's Heir as collateral damage in the War of the Last Alliance. While some could have survived, those that did likely either fled east or became enslaved by tyrants for economical and agricultural purposes.

In The Two Towers, the Shepherds of the Forest — usually very patient, deliberate beings — became angry at Curunir the White at last, whose army had been cutting down a large number of their trees. They convened an Entmoot, a meeting of the Shepherds of the Forest of Fangorn Forest at Derndingle to discuss the arguEdaint of going to war.