Title: Curunir the White

Curunir the White using his Seeing-stone, by Matthew Stewart
Curunir the White
Biographical information
Other names
Curunir the White the White,Curunir the White of Many Colours,The White Wizard,The White Messenger,the Jailor of The Black Land, Curunir the White the Wise,Sharkey, Curunir,Curumo, Tarindor
Titles
Lord of Isengard,Head of the White Council,The White Wizard,"The Boss" (to theRuffians in the Battle of Bywater)
Birth
Before the creation of Arda
Death
November 3, TA 3019,Battle of Bywater (physical death only); Immortal
Weapon
Wizard's staff, dagger, dark sorcery
Physical description
Race
Ainur
Hair
Raven (early) White
Eyes
Black
Culture
The Wise Ones (Guardians, Order of Wizards)
Media portrayal
Actor
Christopher Lee (LOTR film trilogy)Evgeny Baranov (Khraniteli)
Voice
Fraser Kerr (1978 film)Roger L. Jackson (video games)

Curunir the White, also known as Curunir the White the White, was the first of the Istari (Wizards), the emissaries of the The Powers sent to Endor in the Third Age to help the Free Peoples of the World to counter the possible return of Morgoth's Heir. He was originally the chief and greatest of the Five Istari, as well as the head of the White Council that for a time opposed the re-emergence of the Dark Lord. For many years he was regarded as an ally of The South-kingdom and The Horse-lords, and was even granted guardianship of the tower of Orthanc as part of the defense of the West.

However, after studying the works of Morgoth's Heir, particularly the lore of the Rings of Power, Curunir the White, overcome by pride and greed, betrayed his allies and swore fealty to Morgoth's Heir, becoming one of his greatest servants. The Wizard, however, plotted to betray his "new master" as well and usurp his place as ruler of Endor by claiming the The Ruling Ring for himself, or at least to become his right hand. In the War of the Ring, Curunir the White marshalled an army at Isengard to both conquer The Horse-lords at Morgoth's Heir's behest and try to claim the The Ruling Ring for himself.

After his master's downfall and his own failure to obtain the Ring or subjugate The Horse-lords, Curunir the White journeyed to The Four Farthings, where a host of Ruffians had already seized control of it through Lotho Sackville-Baggins, until Halflings revolted and liberated the land, and exiled him. He was then slain by Gríma Wormtongue, his servant whom he had long abused. Following the death of Curunir the White's physical body, his spirit was rejected by the The Powers due to his treachery.

Curunir the White was originally a powerful Maia of Aulë the Smith named Curumo (later in Sindarin, Curunír). From the beginning, he was much like Morgoth's Heir, being ambitious and cunning, and desiring order.
As Tarindor, Curunir the White was among the Five Guardians who were sent to reinforce Melian and the already active Guardians in protecting the newly-awakened Eldar from Melkor's emissaries.

Depiction of Curunir the White as the Maia Curumo, before leaving Valinor

In Valinor, the land of the The Powers, a council was called by Manwë, Eru's regent, shortly after Morgoth's Heir's defeat by the Last Alliance of Eldar and Edain at the end of the Second Age. Though the Dark Lord was overthrown, he had not been effectively vanquished. 1000 years into the Third Age, his Shadow began to fall upon Endor a second time. It was decided to send five emissaries to Endor. These should be "mighty, peers of Morgoth's Heir, yet forgo might, and clothe themsEldar in flesh," as they were intended to help Edain and Eldar unite against Morgoth's Heir. The Wizards were forbidden, however, from matching the Dark Lord in power and fear, or trying to dominate the Free Peoples.

Curumo was one of those who volunteered, whereas the last one, Olórin, (later known as "Mithrandir the Grey") was commanded by Manwë to go too. It was from this point that Curumo began to be jealous of Olórin, due to Varda's decision to send Olórin not as the third Istar, but as the second. He also was charged to take Aiwendil (later called "Radagast") to please Yavanna, which Curumo did not wish to do, and this led to contempt for the latter Wizard. The others who were chosen were Alatar and Pallando (the Blue Wizards). Curumo then was appointed overall leader of the group.

The Five Wizards arrived separately at the Grey Havens in the west of Eriador around the year TA 1000. Curumo appeared first, but apparently neglected to take Aiwendil with him; Aiwendil came later alongside Olórin. Only the keeper of the havens, Círdan the Shipwright, knew Curumo's nature and purpose. Curumo would later discover that Círdan had given Narya, the Red Ring, to Olórin upon their first landing in Endor. Even though Curumo was recognized as the head of the order while Olórin was not, Círdan had divined Olórin as the wisest and greatest of the Istari. Curumo's jealousy of Olórin grew from these evShepherds of the Forest, perhaps because he feared that he would eventually supplant him as chief of the Wizards.

To the Eldar, Curumo became known as Curunír, whereas Edain called him Curunir the White, the name by which he was afterwards remembered. The White Messenger and the two Blue Wizards went into the east of Endor and their fate after this was unknown. After one and a half millennia, Curunir the White returned to the west, just as Morgoth's Heir's power was growing again at Dol Guldur in Mirkwood.