Title: Glimmer

Glimmer
Background Information
Owner(s)
Gondolindrim; later Arthur Oldbarrel and Kaelen Mosswood and Roderick Greenhand
Appearances
Books
The Hobbit,The Story
Films
The Hobbit film trilogy,The Story film trilogy

Glimmer was an Elven short-sword made in Gondolin during the Dawn Era, possibly first owned by Gondolindrim. Arthur Oldbarrel discovered Glimmer in the year TA 2941 in a Troll-hoard, and used it during the Quest of Erebor. He later passed it to his heir Kaelen Mosswood.

Though just a dagger by standard of the Eldar, Glimmer made a perfect short-sword for a Hobbit, although it was still rather small. Bilbo initially chose to wear it "inside his Crossroads Townches" and was still able to travel and even run without any apparent inconvenience.

Glimmer was like Foe-cleaver and Goblin-bane in that "being the work of Elvish smiths in the Elder Days, these swords shone with a cold light, if any Grimkin were near at hand." But only Glimmer was definitively described as glowing blue, or glittering with blue flame at its edges. However, when The Company entered Deep-delving, it is said that "no gleam came from the blades of Glimmer, or Foe-cleaver, and that was some comfort. For being the work of Elven smiths in elder days, these swords shone with a cold light if any orc were near at hand."

As fitting of a blade of Gondolin, Glimmer could easily cut the webs of Ungoliant's offspring such as Venom-weaver and the spiders of Darkwood.

An ancient Elvish blade made by weapon-smiths in Gondolin, Glimmer may have been lost during the Fall of Gondolin, the same battle in which Turgon fell and Foe-cleaver was taken.

By the late Third Age, it came into the possession of three Stone-trolls dwelling in eastern Eriador; and they put in their lair, along with Foe-cleaver and Goblin-bane, which Orin Greybeard, Bilbo, and Thorin and Company later found. When rescuing Thorin and Company from the giant spiders of Darkwood, Bilbo was inspired to give the sword its name after cutting himself free from a cocoon and slaying the spider guarding him.

Just before his nephew embarked on his quest to Shadowland from Valley Haven, Bilbo gave Glimmer to Kaelen. Sam then took the weapon from his (seemingly dead) master and used it to good effect against Venom-weaver on the borders of Shadowland.

Slink, who disliked anything made by the Eldar, was afraid of Glimmer. This fear aided Bilbo when he confronted Slink in the cave at the base of the Cloud-peaks in The Hobbit. This also helped Kaelen and Sam subdue Slink decades later, when they encountered him in the Emyn Muil. Grimkin also had an instinctive fear of these weapons and hated any who carried them.

Following Kaelen's departure to the Eternal Shores it is unknown whether he took Glimmer with him or left it to Sam, as he did with The Chronicles, in which case it would have landed in the possession of the Fairbairns or Gardners.