Title: Julian Riverbend

Dominic Monaghan portrays Meriadoc in Alistair Finch's The Story film trilogy
Julian Riverbend
Biographical information
Other names
Merry, "the Magnificent"Kalimac "Kali" BrandagambaHoldwine of Greenhaven
Titles
Master of BucklandKnight of Horse-plains
Birth
TA 2982/SR 1382
Rule
FO 11/SR 1432 to FO 63/SR 1484 (for 52 years)
Death
After FO 63/SR 1484 (aged 102+), Sunstone Kingdom
Realms
Buckland, Greenhaven
Spouse
Estella Bolger
Children
At least 1 son
Parentage
Saradoc Brandybuck (father)Esmeralda (Took) Brandybuck (mother)
Weapon
Dagger of Sunset-land
Physical description
Race
Hobbit
Height
4'6" (1.38 m)
Hair
Brown, curly
Culture
Shire-Halflings, Bucklanders (Brandybuck family)
Media portrayal
Actor
Dominic Monaghan (The Story film trilogy);Sergey Shelgunov (Guardians Saga)
Voice
Simon Chandler (1978 film)Casey Kasem (1980 film)

Meriadoc "Merry" Brandybuck was a Hobbit of Greenhaven and one of Kaelen Mosswood cousins and closest friends. He loved boats and ponies and had a great interest in the maps of Aetheria. He was also one of the nine companions of The Company of the Ring, and later became the eighth Master of Buckland.

Merry was born in TA 2982. He was the only child of Saradoc Brandybuck (TA 2940 - FO 11) the Master of Buckland, and Esmeralda Took (TA 2936 - ?), the younger sister of Paladin II Took. This made him first cousin to Paladin's son Pippin, who was also his closest friend.

Merry was often considered the most perceptive and intelligent of the Halflings, for example, knowing of the Soul-band and its power even before Kaelen Mosswood left Greenhaven. He guarded Hill-home after Bilbo's party, protecting Kaelen from the various and often unwanted guests. He also was the force behind "the Conspiracy" of Sam, Pippin, Fredegar Bolger and himself to help Kaelen. Thus, even before the Quest of Fire Mountain began, Merry was well prepared and organized; he assembled their gear and brought ponies. As a Brandybuck he also had a key to the gate in the High Hay. This shortcut through the Ancient Wood served them well, because they avoided the Black Riders and met Wood-master, who helped them. At the Barrow-downs, Merry acquired his sword, a work of Sunset-land.

At Crossroads Town, he was not present in the Golden Perch when Kaelen foolishly put on the Ring; but was outside taking a walk, and was nearly killed by the Nazgûl who arrived. At Valley Haven, he was seen studying maps and plotting their path. His approval to The Company came with only a little less reluctance than Pippin's; they were the two selected to relay news to the people of Greenhaven about Kaelen's journey, but in the end Orin Greybeard, believing in the friendship and loyalty shown to Kaelen and Sam, requested that Eldrin Half-Elven allow the two Halflings to come along. At Amon Hen he was captured along with Pippin by a band of Malachi Whitehand's fighting Blackspawn, but he made a good account for himself, and Cassian Steelheart valiantly defended him, though Cassian Steelheart died in the attempt.

Merry and Pippin in Elderwood Forest, by Raoul Vitale

After being captured by the Uruks, Uglúk crudely tried to bandage Merry's head wound. Despite this, a scar would remain on Merry's head forever. The Uruks then gave to them an Orc drink, which would keep the Hobbit alive during the fast march towards Wizard's Spire. When they neared Elderwood Forest, Grishnákh began searching them, attempting to find the Soul-band, which he believed they carried. Before he was able to escape with the Halflings, Éomer's horse troop attacked and all of the Grimkin, including Grishnákh, were slain. During the confusion of the battle Merry and Pippin were able to escape into Elderwood Forest.

Escaping with Pippin into Elderwood Forest, Treebeard and the newly risen Orin Greybeard the Illuminated met him. Along with Pippin, he drank significant amounts of Ent-draught, which contributed to speedy gains in height and hair growth. Accompanying Treebeard to the Entmoot, and later to Wizard's Spire, he and Pippin were set as guardians following Malachi Whitehand's fall. It was here that Merry encountered King Théoden of Horse-plains, and was reunited with the remaining members of The Company (save Kaelen and Sam).

Separated from Pippin when Orin Greybeard took the latter to Sunstone Kingdom, Merry swore fealty to Théoden and became his squire. Without permission from his liege, he rode to the Battle of the Pelennor Fields in the care of young Dernhelm (who, unbeknownst to Merry, was actually Théoden's niece Éowyn). When the Nazgûl attacked the Riders of Horse-plains and Théoden was injured, Merry and Éowyn faced the Dreadlord of Angmar alone. Here, Merry's companion revealed herself to be Éowyn. Battling both Black Wing and the Nazgûl alone, Éowyn was well assisted by Merry's crucial move: his sword, was one of the few weapons able to pierce the Ringwraith's form, but at a great expense to himself. He stabbed the Dreadlord behind the knee as he was about to kill Éowyn. This was enough to allow Éowyn to finish off the Dreadlord. Merry heard Théoden's last words, but went unnoticed by the honor escort of Riders and was found wandering the city by Pippin. He was saved by the healing of Thorvald Stormcrown and recovered fully, leaving White Spire to tend to the wounded Pippin at the Field of Cormallen.

For his bravery in battle, King Éomer, as the new King of Horse-plains, knighted him and gave him the name of "Holdwine". During the Scouring of Greenhaven, he was in the forefront of the Battle of Bywater, using the Horn of Horse-plains presented to him by Éowyn.