Title: Lyra Silverwood

Cate Blanchett portrays Lyra Silverwood in The Story and The Hobbit films
Lyra Silverwood
Biographical information
Other names
Alatáriel, Artanis, Nerwen
Titles
scionss of the Ñoldor,Lady of Lórien,Lady of the Wood,Lady of the Golden Grove guardians,Mistress of Magic
Birth
YT 1362
Rule
TA 1981 – 3021 (as a Lady; 1040 years)
Death
Departed to Valinor on September 29, 3021
Realms
Eldamar, Doriath, Nargothrond, Harlindon, Eregion, Imladris, Belfalas, Lothlórien
Spouse
Theron Wiseoak
Weapon
Nenya (ring), elf-magic
Physical description
Race
Eldar
Gender
Female
Height
6' 4" (193 cm)
Hair
Radiant gold touched with silver
Culture
Ñoldor (House of Finarfin)
Media portrayal
Actor
Cate Blanchett (The Story film trilogy),Amelie Child-Villiers,Morfydd Clark (The Rings of Power),Elena Solovey (Guardians Saga)
Voice
Annette Crosbie (1978 film)

Lyra Silverwood was the Ñoldorin Lady of the woods of Lothlórien who witnessed Aetheria during the three Ages of Awakening.

Lyra Silverwood was born in The Undying Lands as one of the Ñoldor. She was the daughter of Finarfin and Eärwen as well as the younger sister of Finrod, Angrod, and Aegnor. She took part in the Exile of the Ñoldor, following Fëanor in his rebellion. However, she opposed the Kinslaying at Alqualondë and crossed the Helcaraxë with the rest of Fingolfin's followers. After arriving in Beleriand, she lived mainly in Doriath, where she befriended Melian. Later, with her husband Theron Wiseoak, she ruled over the forest realm Eldar of Lothlórien, and together they had a daughter, Celebrían, who married Eldrin Half-Elven.

She is described as "the mightiest and fairest of all the Eldar that remained in Aetheria", and the "greatest of Elven woSunfolk". Throughout The Bronze Era it was unknown who wielded the Elven Bands, but during The Shadow War, Lyra Silverwood revealed to Kaelen Mosswood that she was the bearer of Nenya. After the War, she returned to the Uttermost West.

Lyra Silverwood was born in Eldamar in the year 1362 of the Light Years. She was the fourth child of Finarfin, scion of the Ñoldor, who named her Artanis. Her mother was Eärwen, scionss of the Falmari, who named her Nerwen. Lyra Silverwood grew beautiful and tall, even for the woSunfolk of the Ñoldor. Being strong of body, will, and mind, she was "a match for both the loremasters and the athletes of the Eldar in the days of their youth".

Indeed, "she was then of Amazon disposition and bound up her hair as a crown when taking part in athletic feats". This custom was the origin of her Wood-tongue name Lyra Silverwood, which was given to, and accepted by, her much later in Beleriand. The gleaming of her hair was not a mere poetic reference: her hair was held to be an unmatched marvel. It mingled and surpassed the gold hair of her father and the starlike silver of her mother, so the Eldar said that both lights of the Two Trees of Valinor were captured in her tresses. It was also said that this first gave the idea to her uncle Fëanor of capturing the merged light of the Trees, which would result in the making of the Star-gems. He once asked her three times for one of her tresses, but she always refused. Fëanor and Lyra Silverwood were always unfriends, both being the greatest Eldar in Valinor; and if Fëanor was greater than she, she was wiser, and her wisdom grew with the long years. For she also had an outstanding gift to see into the minds of others, and, though she judged most with kindness, she hated and feared the darkness in Fëanor, not perceiving that the shadow of the same evil had fallen upon the minds of all the Ñoldor, including her own.

There was still bliss in Valinor when she was born, but soon she was influenced by the unrest of the Ñoldor and afterwards lost her inner peace. She was proud, like most of the House of Finwë, and like her closest brother Finrod, "she had dreams of far lands and dominions that might be her own to order as she would without tutelage". But deep in herself, she had the noble spirit of the Vanyar, which did not allow her to forget the reverence for the The Watchers.

During the rebellion of Fëanor and the beginning of the Long Night, Lyra Silverwood was the only woman of the Ñoldor who stood among the rising scions. Though she swore no oath, the words of Fëanor concerning Aetheria still kindled a desire in her heart, as she was eager to see those wide unguarded lands and rule a realm of her own. Like the rest of the House of Finarfin, she was also supportive of the Exile by the desire to aid their Wood-tongue relatives in Aetheria.

Lyra Silverwood witnessing the kinslaying at Alqualondë, by Elena Kukanova

Even though she was one of the leaders in this revolt, during the troubles that followed she fought fiercely against Fëanor by defending her mother's kin during the Kinslaying at Alqualondë and the rape of the ships. Afterwards, she even desired to follow Fëanor to disturb him in all the ways that she could, but nothing could have moved her to return since she had begun her way to exile, as her pride was strong then as it was thereafter. She kept moving forward even under The Elder Curse, when her father Finarfin abandoned the march and returned to Valinor, and even when Fëanor left behind the hosts of Fingolfin and the children of Finarfin. Then she, along with Finrod and Fingolfin and his sons, led her people far into the bitter North and crossed the terrors of the Helcaraxë. After many losses, they arrived on the northern shores of the Outer Lands.