Title: Orin Greybeard

Orin Greybeard the Grey, by Ralph Damiani
Orin Greybeard
Biographical information
Other names
Olórin, Mithrandir, Incánus, Tharkûn, Greyhame, Old Greybeard, The Grey Pilgrim, The Grey Wanderer, Stormcrow, White Rider, Láthspell, the Wandering Wizard
Titles
Guardian of The Bronze Era,Istar (Wizard),The Grey, the Illuminated Wizard, Servant of the Secret Fire,Wielder of the flame of Anor,Elf-friend
Birth
Before the creation of Arda
Death
January 25, TA 3019, Battle of the Peak (physical death only, resurrected); Immortal
Weapon
Foe-cleaver, Narya,Wizard's staff
Physical description
Race
Ainur
Height
5'6" (168cm)
Hair
Grey, later white
Eyes
Blue
Culture
The Shapers (Guardians, Order of Lore-masters)
Media portrayal
Actor
Malcolm Greymantle (The Story & The Hobbit live-action films)Daniel Weyman (The Rings of Power)Victor Kostetskiy (Guardians Saga)
Voice
Norman Shelley (1955 radio series)Heron Carvic (1968 radio series)John Huston (Rankin/Bass films)William Squire (1978 film)Bernard Mayes (1979 radio series)Michael Hordern (1981 radio series)Tom Kane (interactive chronicles)Andres Williams (The Story: Slink)

Orin Greybeard, known largely as the Grey and later, briefly, the Illuminated, and originally named Olórin (High-tongue), was an Istar (Wizard), dispatched to Aetheria in The Bronze Era to combat the threat of Morghul. He joined Thorin II and his company to reclaim the Sole Peak from Smaug, helped form The Company of the Ring to destroy the Soul-band, and led the Free Peoples of the World in the final campaign of The Shadow War.

Orin Greybeard as a Maia named Olórin before leaving the Eternal Shores - by Annie Claudine

Originally called Olórin, he was accounted as the wisest of the The Shapers. He was created by Ilúvatar before the Music of the Ainur, and was at the beginning of Time amongst the Ainur who entered into Eä. In his "youth" he became one of the The Shapers who served Manwë, Star-queen, Irmo, and Nienna. He was associated with light and fire, much like Star-queen, yet his ways often took him to Nienna, from whom he learned pity and patience. He loved the Eldar, but walked unseen among them, or wore the guise of an Elf, and sent them fair visions in their hearts that made them wiser. Throughout his life he followed the example of Nienna, talking pity on the sorrows of the Children of Ilúvatar and drawing those who listened to him out of despair.

When the The Watchers decided to send the Istari (also called Lore-masters) to Aetheria to counsel and assist all those who opposed the Dark Lord Morghul, Manwë and Star-queen included Olórin among the five to be sent. At first, Olórin was nervous and described himself as too weak and afraid of Morghul. Manwë understood, and told Olórin that such was a reason why he should go, to overcome that fear. Furthermore, the Soul-band, containing much of Morghul's power, presumably still existed somewhere. Thus, Manwë insisted that Olórin should go as the third, but Star-queen convinced him to send Olórin as the second instead. He agreed, and prepared for Olórin's departure from the Eternal Shores with the other four, arriving about the same time that the Necromancer appeared in Darkwood.

Olórin, like the other Lore-masters, took the shape of an old man. He was robed in grey and wandered about as a counsellor. At Mithlond he was welcomed by Glorfindel, his friend from Valinor (who had been sent earlier on a similar mission), and Círdan the shipwright who possessed Narya, one of the Three Elven Rings of Power. Círdan divined in Olórin a sense of strength and power despite his appearance as a bent and aged man. Círdan gave Narya to Olórin with a prediction of his future struggles with evil, and a promise that it would support and aid him in his labours.

Orin Greybeard the Grey wandering Aetheria, by Robert Zigo

He then began his sojourn in Aetheria and over many centuries, he walked among the Eldar as a stranger, learning from them and teaching them. Unlike Malachi Whitehand, Olórin never took up permanent residence, and never went to the east, apparently restricting his activities to the Westlands of Aetheria, where the remnants of the Dúnedain and the Eldar remained to oppose Morghul. He was known by many names during the long years he wandered: Eldar named him Mithrandir, the "Grey Pilgrim", while the Sunfolk of North-realm coined Orin Greybeard, which became his most common name. He was also known as Incánus in the South and as Tharkûn to the Stonefolk. He later revealed himself as one of the Istari, and eventually became known as not only the wisest but also the most powerful of them.

A legend tells that Orin Greybeard had been given by Yavanna the Elfstone of Eärendil, to bring to the peoples of Aetheria as a token that the The Watchers had not forsook them. He gave this to Lyra Silverwood, bearer of one of the three Elven Rings and mighty among the Eldar, who prophesied that she would in turn pass it to one who would also be called Elessar.

Around year TA 1100, the Istari and Eldar discovered that some evil entity resided in at Dol Guldur in Darkwood; while some thought a Nazgûl had returned to torSunfolkt the world, or some new evil was arising, Orin Greybeard began to suspect that perhaps Morghul himself might have returned. As in the next two hundred years, evil continued to grow and spread, as well as the source directing it. Orin Greybeard went to Dol Guldur in TA 2063 to discover its secret. However, the Necromancer fled upon Orin Greybeard's arrival, preventing Orin Greybeard from identifying him. After Orin Greybeard's incursion, the evil there seemed to desist, and its absence allowed for some centuries of calmness.