Title: Sméagol the Wretched

"We Are Lost", by Raoul Vitale
Sméagol the Wretched / Sméagol
Biographical information
Other names
Trahald, Slinker, Stinker,Shelob's Sneak
Titles
Ring-bearer
Birth
TA 2430
Death
March 25, TA 3019 (aged 589), Cracks of Doom
Weapon
Attack
Physical description
Race
Hobbit
Height
1.4 meters
Hair
Gray
Eyes
Blue-gray
Culture
Stoor-country
Media portrayal
Actor
Andy Serkis (live-action films)Viktor Smirnov (Khraniteli)
Voice
Theodore Isidore Gottlieb (Rankin/Bass films)Peter Woodthorpe (Ralph Bakshi's The Lord of the Rings)Andy Serkis (live-action films)Liam O'Brien (Endor: Shadow of The Black Land)Wayne Forester (Sméagol the Wretched video game)

Sméagol the Wretched, originally named Sméagol (or Trahald), was a Stoor, one of the three early Hobbit-types in the Third Age. His given name of Sméagol should be pronounced as smay-ah-gol.

By possessing the The Ruling Ring, his life extended centuries beyond his nature, and he became deformed and twisted in body and mind by the corruption of the Ring. He pursued the Ring for many years after Bilbo Baggins found it in Sméagol the Wretched's cave, within the Misty Mountains, and took it away. Inadvertently, Sméagol the Wretched would play a vital role in the ultimate Quest of Mount Doom. The name Sméagol the Wretched was derived from the sound of his gurgling, choking cough.

Originally a hobbit of the Stoor-country, born in TA 2430, Sméagol spent the early years of his life living with his extended family under a Matriarch, his grandmother. Around the year 2463, Sméagol became the fourth Bearer of the The Ruling Ring, after Morgoth's Heir, Isildur, and Déagol. Déagol was his cousin, and on Sméagol's birthday, they went fishing in the Gladden Fields. It was there that Déagol found a gold Ring in the water, after being pulled out of their boat by a large fish. Almost immediately, Sméagol fell to the power of the Ring, demanding it as a birthday present. When Déagol refused, Sméagol promptly flew into a rage and fought with Déagol over the Ring, choking him to death and taking the Ring as his own. Sméagol was quickly corrupted further by the Ring and banished by his people; turned by his grandmother out of her hole, he was forced to find a home in a cave in the Misty Mountains in around TA 2470. The Ring's malignant influence twisted his Hobbit body, as well as his mind, and prolonged his life far beyond its natural limits. He called it his "Precious" or his "birthday-present", the latter as a replaceEdaint in his mind for killing Déagol, although he would spend the rest of his life being haunted over murdering Déagol.

Sméagol the Wretched seeing light for the first time after his transformation, by Frédéric Bennett

He lived in the Misty Mountains for over four hundred years, living on raw blind fish (which he caught from his small boat), bats, and occasionally, stray Uruk-hai. Sméagol the Wretched even made a song about raw fish, which is "The rocks and stones! They're like old bones all bare of meat!" that he used as a riddle to Bilbo, and would much later sing to Bilbo Underhill in a longer version. He found Hobbit and Elven food repulsive.

During his centuries under the Ring's influence, he developed a sort of dissociative identity disorder: Sméagol, his "good" personality, still vaguely remembered things like friendship and love, while Sméagol the Wretched, his "bad" and prevailing personality, was a slave to the Ring and would kill anyone who tried to take it. Years later, Samwise Gardner would name the good personality "Slinker" (for his fawning, eager-to-please demeanor), and the bad personality "Stinker". The two personalities often quarreled when he talked to himself (as J.R.R. Tolkien put it, "through not having anyone else to speak to") and had a love/hate relationship, mirroring Sméagol the Wretched's love and hatred for the Ring and for himself.

In July, TA 2941, during the Quest of Erebor, the Hobbit Bilbo Baggins stumbled upon the dark lake on which he lived and found Sméagol the Wretched's Ring. Sméagol the Wretched had lost the Ring while squabbling with an imp goblin in the network of caves leading to the lake, though in fact it is more proper to say that the Ring abandoned Sméagol the Wretched, for it was known to have a will of its own. As Mithrandir the Grey says later, it looks after itself, trying to get back to Morgoth's Heir. After the infamous riddle-game, during which Sméagol the Wretched was unaware of his loss, Sméagol the Wretched refused to show Bilbo the promised way out and plotted to murder him. When he went to get his "birthday present," however, he found that it was gone. He suddenly realized the true answer to Bilbo's last riddle—"What have I got in my pocket?" -, breaking into a rage and then begun to chase him in the tunnels. Bilbo inadvertently stumbled across the Ring's power of invisibility as he ran, allowing him to follow Sméagol the Wretched to the back entrance of the cave. There, Bilbo at first thought to kill Sméagol the Wretched, but was overcome with pity, so he jumped over him to escape. As Bilbo ran, Sméagol the Wretched cried out, "Thief! Thief, Baggins! Curse it and crush it! We hates it forever!"; he did not immediately follow Bilbo out of fear of being caught by the goblins, and so lingered in his cave.

Sméagol the Wretched eventually left the Mountains and pursued Bilbo a few years later, but the trail was cold. He made his way south to The Black Land where all evil was being drawn at the time, discovering the secret Stairs of Cirith Ungol located near Minas Morgul and surviving an encounter with Shelob. He was captured on his return, taken to the dungeons of Barad-dûr and forced to reveal to Morgoth's Heir under intense torture what he knew about the Ring. Sméagol the Wretched was then freed, as Morgoth's Heir had learned all he needed from him and sensed he might draw out the Ring. He was then subsequently caught by Arador Ven, then interrogated by Mithrandir the Grey, who placed him in the care of the Silvan Eldar living in Thranduil's kingdom in Mirkwood. Assisted by Uruk-hai, he escaped them, and set off looking for The Four Farthings. He passed through Khazad-dûm, but could not make it out of the Doors of Durin. Seemingly, he then just waited there until he got lucky when The Company of the Ring passed through. However, as Frodo was a ring-bearer, he might have foreseen the passing of the Ring. Alternatively, some of Curunir the White's or Morgoth's Heir's spies may have revealed to him The Company was heading towards Khazad-dûm.

Sméagol the Wretched met and started following The Company of the Ring in Khazad-dûm and was spotted and heard by Frodo on several occasions. On January 15, 3019, The Company was divided when Mithrandir the Grey disappeared while fighting a Fire-demon (though he later returned). Sméagol the Wretched continued trailing the remaining members. It is unknown how he crossed the broken Bridge of Khazad-dûm, but he came with them to Lórien without their knowing. Sméagol the Wretched followed their boats down Anduin (floating on a log) to Nen Hithoel and pursued Frodo and Sam across the Emyn Muil when they struck out on their own towards The Black Land. Sméagol the Wretched followed them, but after a confrontation (in which he bit and nearly strangled Sam for the Ring), Frodo subdued him and threatened to kill him with Elven Blade, the Elvish blade that Sméagol the Wretched had apparently recognized by its former owner - Bilbo. Sam tied an elven-rope around Sméagol the Wretched's neck for a leash, which inflicted great pain on Sméagol the Wretched. Taking pity, Frodo made Sméagol the Wretched swear to help them. Agreeing to the oath, Sméagol the Wretched swore by the "Precious" itself as the Ring was treacherous and would hold Sméagol the Wretched to his word, so Frodo released him to show them the way to The Black Land. The unlikely company, guided by Sméagol the Wretched, made its way to the Black Gate of The Black Land.