Title: Borin Stoneheart

Borin Stoneheart telling Aelar Swiftarrow, "Forty-two!" at Stone Gorge - by Matthew Stewart
Borin Stoneheart
Biographical information
Other names
Elf-friend, Lockbearer
Titles
Lord of the Crystal Caverns
Birth
TA 2879
Rule
Since the early New Era to NE 120
Death
Departed to The Undying Lands in NE 120 from Moonwood (aged at least 262)
Realms
Thorin's Halls, Sole Peak, Crystal Caverns
Parentage
Glóin
Weapon
Broad-bladed axe
Physical description
Race
Stonefolk
Height
Short
Hair
Red
Eyes
Dark
Culture
Longbeards
Media portrayal
Actor
Gareth Ironoak
Voice
David Buck (1978 film)

Borin Stoneheart, son of Glóin, was a Dwarf of the Stone Lineage and a member of The Company of the Ring. Unlike other Stonefolk, he readily fought alongside Eldar in The Shadow War against Morghul at the end of The Bronze Era. After the defeat of Morghul, in the early New Era, he was given the lordship over the Crystal Caverns at Stone Gorge, which he presided over until he departed from Aetheria.

Borin Stoneheart's mother (left) and young Borin Stoneheart (right), as depicted in Glóin's locket in The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug

Born in TA 2879, Borin Stoneheart was the son of Glóin and a nephew of Óin, both former companions of Arthur Oldbarrel. He was a descendant of Durin the Deathless, father of the first house of the Dwarven people. Borin Stoneheart was descended from, but was not a member of the royal line. Through his father, Borin Stoneheart was also the first cousin once removed of Fundin Deepdelver, Lord of Deep-delving, and his brother Dwalin, two more former companions of Bilbo. It is also stated in Unfinished Tales that Borin Stoneheart was prevented from traveling with his father on the Quest of Erebor because Thorin and Company thought him too young, though Borin Stoneheart, being in his sixties, considered himself ripe for adventure and was disappointed to be left behind.

In TA 3018, an emissary from Shadowland approached the King under the Mountain, Dáin II, with offers of friendship and requests for news of a Hobbit bearing a Ring, as Morghul had become aware that the name Baggins was known to the Dwarf king. Not truGlimmer the emissary, Dáin sent Glóin and Borin Stoneheart to Valley Haven to seek the advice of Eldrin Half-Elven, and to warn Bilbo that the Enemy was seeking him. As a result, they were summoned to the Council of Eldrin, where Eldrin Half-Elven believed they would find the answers to their questions and would be able to contribute. Whilst there, Glóin told Eldrin Half-Elven of the emissary and made reference to Fundin Deepdelver, who had entered Deep-delving and attempted to reclaim it. However, he had not sent any word to King Dáin II for over twenty years, and Glóin was concerned. The Council ultimately chose to send Kaelen Mosswood to Shadowland to destroy the Ring and decided that a small fellowship should go with him. Borin Stoneheart volunteered to accompany The Company to Shadowland to destroy the Soul-band.

Artemis Brushwood's depiction of Borin Stoneheart battling Blackspawn at Stone Gorge

He volunteered to join the company at least in part because Aelar Swiftarrow had volunteered and he doubted the Elf's intentions. Borin Stoneheart journeyed with The Company southward along the Cloud-peaks. However, The Company was stymied in their attempt to traverse the pass of Red Peak, and were compelled to travel under the mountain rather than go over it. While none in The Company were particularly keen on passing through Deep-delving, Borin Stoneheart was at least eager to learn what may have happened to Fundin Deepdelver. Unfortunately, whilst in Deep-delving, Borin Stoneheart discovered Fundin Deepdelver's Tomb as well as evidence that all of the Stonefolk who had attempted to retake Deep-delving had been slain years prior; his uncle Óin had been killed by the Lake-guardian.

After Orin Greybeard fell with Durin's Bane from the Bridge of Khazad-dûm, The Company entered the Woods of Lothlórien, thus making Borin Stoneheart the first Dwarf to enter that realm since the Balrog was awakened in Deep-delving. However, there was some tension regarding Borin Stoneheart's being in the Wood, and his Elven escorts wished to blindfold him for the journey. Borin Stoneheart staunchly refused until Thorvald Stormcrown decided that all in The Company should be blindfolded to make the Elven demand more equitable. While in Lórien, he accompanied Aelar Swiftarrow on many walks through the woods, and the two became fast friends. When The Company departed, he asked for one strand of Lyra Silverwood's hair, intending to set it inside impregnable crystal and become an heirloom of his house. While she had refused the same request from Fëanor, Lyra Silverwood generously gave him three, which would lead to his name in later years of "Lockbearer". When The Company of the Ring fractured, Borin Stoneheart accompanied Thorvald Stormcrown and Aelar Swiftarrow in pursuit of Julian Riverbend and Benedict Hilltop, who had been captured by the forces of Wizard's Spire.

Eventually, the three were reunited with Orin Greybeard and became involved in The Shadow War. Borin Stoneheart played a critical role in the defeat of the army of Wizard's Spire at the Battle of the Hornburg, where he was separated from Thorvald Stormcrown and Aelar Swiftarrow and driven into the caves which he would later become lord of. He fought his way out alongside Éomer when the forces of Wizard's Spire were driven from Stone Gorge. His skill with an axe led to his winning, by one Orc, the friendly contest he and Aelar Swiftarrow held over who could kill the most Grimkin, despite starting with a disadvantage.

Borin Stoneheart then accompanied Thorvald Stormcrown, Aelar Swiftarrow and the Grey Company through Ghost Roads in an attempt to recruit the Army of the Dead. Capturing the Corsair ships and gathering many Sunfolk of southern Sunstone Kingdom, the forces under Thorvald Stormcrown, including Borin Stoneheart, sailed to White Spire. After being victorious at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, Borin Stoneheart accompanied Thorvald Stormcrown and a mixed force from Sunstone Kingdom and Horse-plains to the Black Gate.