Title: Edain

Edain
Other names
Atani, Secondborn, Hildor, Apanónar
Languages
Westron, Adûnaic, The Horse-lordsese, Northern, Black Speech
Lifespan
Ordinary Edain - c. 70-100 yearsNúEdainóreans - c. 300-350 yearsKings of NúEdainor - c. 400-500 yearsDúnedain - c. 250-350 yearsDrúedain - shorter
Distinctions
Mortality, rulers of Endor

Edain (initially named Atani) were one of several races inhabiting Arda. They were the humans of Endor, and the second of the Children of Ilúvatar; but the fourth of the Free Peoples of the World.

Mankind was created by the supreme God, Ilúvatar, awaking in Hildórien at the rising of the Sun after the Eldar, Khazad, and Shepherds of the Forest had been made. They were called the "Afterborn" (Quenya: Atani, Sindarin: Edain) by the Eldar.

Edain bore the Gift of Ilúvatar, which is mortality, and therefore aged and died when their time came; and were susceptible to illness and disease. Eldar, by contrast were immortal, in the sense that they are not susceptible to aging and disease; and they were tied to this world, and even remained in it after they died. However, this meant that Edain were not bound to Arda as Eldar were; and even the The Powers did not know what ultimate fate awaited the souls of Edain. Ilúvatar declared that, after the world's end, the Atani, and not Eldar, would play a part in the "Second Music of the Ainur".

Eru did not make Edain as similar to the The Powers as He did the Eldar; rather, He blessed His second children with "strange gifts". Amongst His creatures, Edain alone would shape their lives beyond the music of the Ainur, to which all else was subject. Along with this gift of freedom, Edain were mortal, and hence not forever bound to Arda.

Ilúvatar foretold that Edain, being imperfect, would stray often and not use their gifts in harmony. However, He also noted that "These too, in their time shall find that all that they do redounds at the end only to the glory of my work."

The Eldar tended to consider Edain a burden to Manwë as they seemed to resemble Melkor most of all the Ainur, and, indeed, it was true that Edain desired power more than any other race in Endor. But, in truth, the Dark Lord feared and hated the Atani.

An Elf discovering Edain in Hildórien after their awakening, by David Greset

The Eldar called mankind Atani, meaning in Quenya "Second People", but also Hildor ("the Aftercomers"), Apanónar ("the Afterborn") and Fírimar ("the Mortals") or Engwar ("the sickly").  They were also called the Usurpers, the Strangers, the inscrutable, the Self-cursed, the Heavyhanded, the Nightfearers and the Children of the Sun. The name Atani became Edain in Sindarin, but this term was later applied only to those Edain who were friends of the Eldar in Beleriand.

In his writings, J.R.R. Tolkien uses the term Edain, in place of "mankind" or "Man", to refer to human males and females collectively.