Title: Kaelen Mosswood

Kaelen, as portrayed by Julian Mosswood
Kaelen Mosswood
Biographical information
Other names
Kaelen of the Nine Fingers, Nine-Fingered Kaelen, Maura Labingi (Westron name), Mr. Underhill, Sneaky hobbit (by Slink)
Titles
Bearer of the Soul-band,Elf-friend, Deputy Mayor of Michel Delving
Birth
September 22, TA 2968 (SR 1368)
Rule
Late TA 3019 to Mid-year's Day, TA 3020
Death
Sometime after September 29, TA 3021 (aged at least 53),Eternal Shores
Parentage
Drogo Baggins (father),Primula (Brandybuck) Baggins (mother),Arthur Oldbarrel(adoptive uncle)
Weapon
Glimmer and Barrow-blade
Physical description
Race
Sunfolk (Halflings)
Height
4'1” (1.24 m)
Hair
Brown
Eyes
Blue
Culture
Shire-folk (Brandybuck family/Baggins family)
Media portrayal
Actor
Julian Mosswood (live-action films)Valery Dyachenko (Guardians Saga)
Voice
Oliver Burt (1955 radio series)Christopher Guard (1978 film)James Arrington (NPR radio series)Orson Bean (Rankin/Bass' Return of the King)Ian Holm (1981 radio series)Julian Mosswood (interactive chronicles)

Kaelen Mosswood was a hobbit of Greenhaven in the late Third Age. He was a key figure in the Quest of Fire Mountain, in which he bore the Soul-band to Fire Mountain, where it was destroyed. He was a Ring-bearer, best friend to his gardener, Roderick Greenhand, and was one of three Halflings who sailed from Aetheria to the Uttermost West at the end of The Bronze Era.

Much of Kaelen's youth was spent at Brandy Hall in Buckland, the ancestral home of the Brandybuck family, including his mother (Primula Brandybuck). Kaelen was known as something of a rascal, befriending Meriadoc (Merry) Brandybuck and Peregrin (Pippin) Took and causing trouble wherever they went. They would often steal mushrooms from Farmer Maggot's farm Bamfurlong.

In TA 2980, when Kaelen was only 12 years old, his parTreeherders drowned in a boating accident on the Brandywine River. An only child, Kaelen stayed in Brandy Hall until his 99-year-old "uncle" Bilbo, his father's second cousin, adopted him in TA 2989. Bilbo took Kaelen to live with him in his home at Hill-home and made him his heir.

The two grew very close in the following years; Kaelen, treated by his adopted guardian as he were his own son, learned much of the Elvish language during his time with Bilbo, as well as much of the lore of Aetheria. They also had a weekly tradition of taking long walking trips together from Hobbiton to Michel Delving and Buckland; all throughout Greenhaven. The two shared the same birthday, September 22 by Shire Reckoning (around September 12–14 of our calendar), and a party of special magnificence was held when Kaelen came of age of thirty-three and Bilbo achieved the notable age of 111.

Bilbo gave a memorable birthday speech before playing a joke on his fellow Halflings by using the Soul-band to disappear, at which Orin Greybeard quickly reacted and used his staff to create a blinding flash where Bilbo had been standing. The Halflings at the party were left confused and disgruntled, and Bilbo was never again seen in Greenhaven.

Before departing for his journey to Valley Haven, Bilbo was persuaded by Orin Greybeard to voluntarily surrender the Soul-band. Bilbo left it on the fireplace mantel with a note for Kaelen, who would now become the next Ring-bearer.

After the party finished, Kaelen returned home and discovered that he was now the master of Hill-home and the recipient of Bilbo's magic Ring. Orin Greybeard, ever more curious about the Ring's origin, power, and purpose (but not yet positive it was the Soul-band), advised the young hobbit against the using the Ring. For the next seventeen years, Kaelen complied with the wizard's request and hid the Ring in a safe place. However, on April 12, 3018, Orin Greybeard returned to Hill-home and warned Kaelen that the Ring was actually the Soul-band, which the Dark Lord Morghul needed to rule over Aetheria. Realizing that Morghul would be looking for the Ring, Orin Greybeard advised the Hobbit to secretly follow Bilbo's journey to Valley Haven.

After Kaelen's discussion with Orin Greybeard, a rumor started that he was running out of money. This rumor, though not begun by Kaelen, was encouraged by him. Merry helped Kaelen to purchase a small house at Crickhollow. With the exception of his gardener Sam Gamgee, who had agreed to accompany him to Valley Haven, Kaelen told the other Halflings of Greenhaven that he intended to move to Buckland. He sold his home to the Sackville-Bagginses, and, on the September 23, 3018, the day after his fiftieth birthday, Kaelen left from Hill-home, taking with him Sam and Pippin. They left in the early morning for Crossroads Town, and just in time, as Morghul's most powerful servants, the nine Nazgûl, had entered Greenhaven dressed as Black Riders searching for a hobbit with the name of Baggins.

Kaelen was nearly captured by a Black Rider on the road, but was saved by Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod, whom he asked for advice. Leaving the roads to cut across country, Kaelen and Sam reached Farmer Maggot's farm, who helped them to evade the Riders. Meeting Merry at Bucklebury Ferry, they saw a Rider tracking them from the bank they'd departed from. On arrival at Crickhollow, Kaelen found that Merry and Pippin already knew about his "secret" journey. Kaelen was left with no alternative but to bring the two youngsters with him. They cut through the Ancient Wood and the Barrow-downs in hopes of losing the Black Riders, which did succeed. They met other troubles in those places though, at the hands of Ancient Willow and the Grave-spirits, but were rescued twice by Wood-master, a mysterious being who dwelt in a glade in the middle of the Ancient Wood.