Title: Seeing-stonei

The Orthanc-stone, used for evil in the War of the Ring
Seeing-stonei
Background Information
Owner(s)
Eldar, NúEdainóreans, Kings of The South-kingdom, Kings of Arnor, Morgoth's Heir, Curunir the White, Denethor II, Arador Ven II
Usage
Communication

The Seeing-stonei (singular Seeing-stone), also known as the Seven Seeing-stones, or the Seven Stones (numbered for those in Endor), were spherical glass-like or translucent stone objects used for communication and intelligence gathering. There were eight diElven Bladeuished ones in total, with seven in Endor.

The Seeing-stonei were made by the Ñoldor in Eldamar, likely by Fëanor himself during his time in Aman in the Years of the Trees, and then given by the Eldar to the Faithful NúEdainóreans, who kept them as heirlooms until the Fall of NúEdainor during the late Second Age. Seven of these stones were rescued and brought to Endor by Elendil and his sons and set them in well-guarded Towers throughout the Realms in Exile. Since the livery of the heirs of Elendil contained seven stars, those stars probably represented the seven Seeing-stonei of the Dúnedain in exile.

The Dúnedain placed the stones across mostly large distances to communicate with one another. The stones were housed at these locations: Annúminas, Amon Sûl, and Elostirion in Arnor, and Osgiliath, Orthanc, Minas Ithil, and Minas Anor in The South-kingdom. There was a Master-stone, separate from the Seven, which resided in Tol Eressëa, in the Tower of Avallónë.

Four of the stones are known to have been lost. The chief stone of the north, at Amon Sûl and the stone from Annúminas were lost with Arvedui in the Icebay of Forochel in TA 1975. The chief stone of the south, in Osgiliath, was lost in the Kin-strife. The stone of Minas Ithil was captured by Morgoth's Heir in TA 2002 and very likely destroyed in the destruction of Barad-dûr.

Seeing-stone of The White City, under possession of ruling steward Denethor II

The stone of Elostirion was taken back to the Undying Lands on the Ring-bearers' ship. Only the stones of Minas Anor and Orthanc remained in Endor, yet the stone of Minas Anor was marred, showing all but the most strong-willed the burning hands of Denethor II.

Curunir the White making communication with Morgoth's Heir in the late Third Age, by Jeremy Bennett; a concept piece for The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2002)

The Seeing-stonei were most readily used by the Heirs of Elendil, as well as those appointed to guard them; the stones responded best to those with the right to use them, hence Denethor's ability to utilize the stone of the White City easily, whereas Curunir the White struggled with its use, and was eventually overcome by the superior will of Morgoth's Heir.

The Seeing-stone were dark, perfectly smooth spheres of varying sizes; some were small and portable, around a foot in diameter, while others (particularly the master-stones) were too enormous to be lifted by Edain. They were completely unmarked or unmarred, and even when unseated, they remained inviolable. The stones had permanent poles aligned with the center of the world, with permanent upper and nether poles. The circumferential faces were the ones that allowed viewing, receiving outside visions, and channeling them to the eye of the beholder on the opposite side; if one wished to look east, he would place himself on the western side of the orb, etc. Unlike the master stones, which could rotate and look in any direction, the smaller ones had fixed positions so that when looked at from a wrong direction, the face would appear blank to the surveyor. The Seeing-stonei could not transmit sound; they could only relay visions or intended thoughts of the users.