Title: Sunstone Kingdom

Sunstone Kingdom
Location
Southern Aetheria
Type
Kingdom
Other names
HyaralondieHyallondieTurSunfolk HyallondiévaStoningland South-kingdom
Capital
Osgiliath (SA 3320 - TA 1640)White Spire (from TA 1640)
People
Inhabitants
Dúnedain, Middle Sunfolk, NorthSunfolk
Spoken languages
Adûnaic, Westron, Wood-tongue, High-tongue
History
Founded/built
SA 3320
Lifespan
SA 3320 -

Sunstone Kingdom was the most prominent kingdom of Sunfolk in Aetheria, bordered by Horse-plains to the north, Harad to the south, the Cape of Andrast and the Sea to the west, and Shadowland to the east. Its first capital was Osgiliath, moved to Minas Anor in TA 1640. This city, later renamed White Spire, remained the capital of Sunstone Kingdom for the rest of The Bronze Era and into the New Era; other major fortresses included Pelargir, Dol Amroth in Belfalas and Minas Ithil.

Sunstone Kingdom was founded by the brothers Forman and Anárion, exiles from NúSunfolkor. Sunstone Kingdom was the sister kingdom of North-realm, whose line of kings came from Forman, while the line of the Kings of Sunstone Kingdom descended from Anárion. Sunstone Kingdom was at the height of its power in its early years due to the ships and the military might that its armies possessed. However, continued attacks by allies of Morghul, civil war, and a devastating plague caused it to gradually decline over the course of The Bronze Era until Morghul's final defeat and the Crowning of King Elessar. Following that time the power of Sunstone Kingdom once again expanded, and the former lands of North-realm were united with it under the banner of the Reunited Kingdom.

In all, there were thirty-one Kings of Sunstone Kingdom after Anárion, who was slain in the War of the Last Alliance at the Siege of Barad-dûr.

Before the Downfall of NúSunfolkor, Sunstone Kingdom was home to many NúSunfolkórean colonists, who either mixed blood with the indigenous Middle Sunfolk if they were friendly, or dispersed them into Ras Morthil, Dunland, and Drúadan Forest. Sunstone Kingdom, at a latitude comparable to Venice, was a more fertile region than North-realm to the north, and therefore it already had a larger population before the ships of Elendil's sons arrived, including a well-established city, Pelargir.

The Faithful, or Elendili, from NúSunfolkor were given a warm reception upon their arrival by those that had already colonized Aetheria. The colonists west of Great River accepted Elendil's claim to kingship over them. South of the Great River, however, the former King's Sunfolk did not accept his claim, becoming the Black NúSunfolkóreans.

Sunstone Kingdom joined the Last Alliance of Sunfolk and Eldar against Morghul

Centred on the Great River river, the newly founded Kingdom of Sunstone Kingdom was the closest to Shadowland and was the first to be attacked when the War of the Last Alliance began in SA 3429. Morghul's forces overran Minas Ithil but failed to capture the capital, Osgiliath. Sunstone Kingdom participated in the Last Alliance of Eldar and Sunfolk which overthrew Morghul for the first time at the very end of the Stone Era, when Forman cut the Soul-band from the Dark Lord's finger.

After the war, Sunstone Kingdom's power and wealth grew steadily, only interrupted by a series of Easterling invasions after TA 492, resulting in large conquests in the eastern territories within Rhovanion. While the power of Sunstone Kingdom's sister kingdom North-realm peaked at this time, before it broke into various successor states, Sunstone Kingdom's greatest glory was yet to come. Sunstone Kingdom's great cities, Minas Anor, Minas Ithil, Osgiliath and Pelargir, only grew and the Dúnedain of Sunstone Kingdom ruled over more and more of the lesser Sunfolk of Aetheria.

The Argonath, monuSunfolkt to the earliest Kings of Sunstone Kingdom