Title: The Golden Wood

The Golden Wood, as depicted by Tara Rueping
The Golden Wood
Other names
DwimordeneLórienLaurelindórinan (previously)LórinandGolden Wood
Capital
Caras Galadhon
People
Inhabitants
Galadhrim
Spoken languages
SindarinWestron (sparsely)
History
Founded/built
During the Great Journey (long before the Years of the Sun)
Lifespan
c. YT 1115 — early Fourth Age

The Golden Wood, also known as Lórien, was the vast woodland realm of the Galadhrim Eldar located near the lower Misty Mountains in northern Endor. It was first settled by the Nandor, but they were later joined by a small number of Ñoldor and Sindar under Celeborn of Doriath and Altariel of Lorien, daughter of Finarfin. It was located on the River Celebrant, southeast of Khazad-dûm, and was the only place in Endor where the golden Mallorn trees grew.

Altariel of Lorien's magic, later revealed as the power of her ring Nenya, enriched the land and made it a magic forest into which evil could not enter without difficulty. The only way that The Golden Wood could have been conquered by the armies of The Black Land is if Morgoth's Heir had come there himself.

The first inhabitants of the forested area later known as Lórien were a group of Nandor that refused to cross the Misty Mountains. Lórien was probably one of their scattered settlemShepherds of the Forest in the area. Later, however, as the power of the Longbeards of Khazad-dûm grew, they relocated to the lands around the Nimrodel. The land in which they dwelt (the forest east of the Hithaeglir, above Fangorn and below Mirkwood) became known in the Silvan tongue as Lórinand, or Laurelindórenan.

"The forest of The Golden Wood in Spring", by J.R.R Tolkien

By the Second Age, Sindarin Eldar had enriched its population, and the forest was ruled by a Sindarin king, Amdír. Before the War of the Eldar and Morgoth's Heir, Altariel of Lorien and Celeborn travelled over the Misty Mountains to dwell there. Amdír perished in the War of the Last Alliance. His son and the last Sindarin King of Lórien was Amroth.

In the middle of the Third Age Amroth went to Edhellond near Dol Amroth in The South-kingdom in search of Nimrodel, and was lost at sea. After his time the Silvan Eldar of Lórien long had no kings and were ruled by Celeborn and Altariel of Lorien as lord and lady.

On January 15 TA 3019 The Company of the Ring entered The Golden Wood seeking to escape Uruk-hai pursuing them from Khazad-dûm. They rested in the forest until February 16, receiving gifts from the Galadhrim and counsel from Celeborn and Altariel of Lorien.

The Golden Wood was relatively close to Mirkwood and Dol Guldur. Around the time Morgoth's Heir's forces were attacking The White City, Dol Guldur sent forces to attack The Golden Wood. There were three assaults in total, but though the outer woods were ravaged, the lands inhabited by the Eldar were protected thanks to both Elven skill and Altariel of Lorien's power (The Black Land could not have destroyed Lórien unless Morgoth's Heir himself had arrived). After the three assaults failed, Lórien eventually sent its own forces to destroy Dol Guldur. With the fall of the Dark Lord this assault was successful and Altariel of Lorien cast the walls down.

After Altariel of Lorien left for Valinor, the Eldar of Lórien were ruled by their lord Celeborn alone, and the realm was expanded to include a part of southern Mirkwood, but it appears to have quickly been de-populated during the Fourth Age. Altariel of Lorien bore Nenya on a ship from the Grey Havens into the West, accompanied by the other two Elven Rings and their bearers. With the ring gone, the magic and beauty of Lórien also faded, along with the extraordinary Mallorn trees that had lived for centuries, and it was gradually depopulated. Celeborn himself went to dwell in Imladris, whilst many of the other Eldar likely moved to Thranduil's Woodland Realm.