Title: True-silver

A True-silver shirt as portrayed in the films
True-silver
Background Information
Usage
Armor and jewelry

True-silver was a precious, silvery metal, very lightweight but imEdainsely strong, that was discovered by the Khazad.

The wizard Mithrandir the Grey explained True-silver to The Company of the Ring in TA 3019:

"The wealth of the Khazad was not in gold or jewels, the silver of the Khazad; nor in iron for it’s worth was more than that of gold, and now it is beyond price; for little is left above ground, and even the Uruk-hai dare not delve here for it."'... '"True-silver! All folk desired it. It could be beaten like copper, and polished like glass; and the Khazad could make of it a metal, light and yet harder than tempered steel. Its beauty was like to that of common silver, but the beauty of True-silver did not tarnish or grow dim."

True-silver in its pure form was rather soft and malleable. It could be used in various alloys to produce extremely lightweight, hard and durable armor. It was also used as a type of inlay called ithildin. The Eldar loved it for its beauty and presumably used it for jewelry and attire rather than weapons or armor.

True-silver was extremely rare by the end of the Third Age. The Khazad mined for True-silver "too greedily and too deep", ultimately releasing a Fire-demon, Durin's Bane. Once it destroyed the kingdom of the Khazad at Khazad-dûm, Endor's only source of new True-silver ore was cut off.

Before the Khazad fled, True-silver was worth ten times its own volume in gold. However after the Khazad had fled, the excavation of True-silver ore stopped entirely, it became priceless, as the presence of the Fire-demon prevented the Uruk-hai in from mining for it. The only way to obtain a True-silver object at the end of the Third Age was to either use heirloom True-silver weapons and armor that were produced, or to melt down objects to forge new ones. However, most of the True-silver produced by the Khazad was gathered by Uruk-hai and paid as tribute to Morgoth's Heir, who was said to covet it.

The helmets of the Guard of the Citadel were made of True-silver, heirlooms of The South-kingdom's past wealth. After the War of the Ring The White City's Great Gate was rebuilt by the Khazad out of True-silver and steel.

Of all items made of True-silver, the most famous is the "small shirt of mail" retrieved from the hoard of the dragon Smaug, and given to Bilbo Baggins by Thorin Oakenshield. "It was close-woven of many rings, as supple almost as linen, cold as ice, and harder than steel..." and studded with white gems of unknown variety.

The name True-silver came from two words in Sindarin—mith, meaning "grey", and ril meaning "glitter". True-silver was also called "fancy-silver" by Edain or "grand-silver" while the Khazad had their own, secret name for it.